# AES S-Box Explorer

AES S-Box Explorer provides a set of Python-based programs to generate various S-Box designs for the [Advanced Encryption Standard (AES)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Advanced_Encryption_Standard) with the GF(2^8) field operations implemented in GF((2^4)^2) and GF(((2^2)^2)^2) composite field representations. Automation scripts are also provided to simulate and verify the designs using [Icarus Verilog](https://bleyer.org/icarus) as well as synthesize the designs using [Yosys](https://yosyshq.net/yosys), both widely used open-source EDA tools.

### Usage

This repository has been tested on Ubuntu 22.04.1 LTS and the pre-requisites can be installed as ```sudo apt install python2 iverilog yosys```.

The ```aes_sbox_modules.v``` file contains all the sub-module definitions required for various S-Box implementations. The ```aes_sbox_lut.v``` file contains the LUT-based S-Box implementation used as golden reference specification for verifying the composite field S-Box implementations. The ```stdcells.lib``` file should be replaced with the appropriate standard cell library for ASIC synthesis.

```AES_SBox_GF_2_4_PolyBases/```: This directory contains all the fiels necessary to generate, simulate, verify and synthesize S-Box designs implemented using various GF((2^4)^2) composite field representations. To programmatically generate the S-Box designs, run ```python2 gen_AES_SBox_GF_2_4_PolyBases.py```. The output file ```AES_SBox_GF_2_4_PolyBases.v``` containing all 192 S-Box designs is also provided for reference. To verify all the designs, run ```source run_sim.sh```. It simulates each S-Box with all 256 possible inputs and compares the outputs with the LUT-based S-Box specification using the test-bench template ```AES_SBox_GF_2_4_PolyBases_tb.v.TEMPLATE```. The message ```PASS: Verification Suite Passed``` is displayed after all 192 simulations are completed. To synthesize all the designs, run ```source run_synth.sh```. It synthesizes each S-Box with the specified standard cell library in ```../stdcells.lib```. A post-synthesis area summary report ```AES_SBox_GF_2_4_PolyBases_synth_summary.csv``` is generated after all 192 synthesis runs are completed.

The ```gen_AES_SBox_GF_2_4_PolyBases.py``` program is written based on the theory presented in [Gueron et al, "Masked Inversion in GF (2^N) using Mixed Field Representations and its Efficient Implementation for AES," 2004](https://pluto.huji.ac.il/~orzu/publications/ijcr_book_2004_01_03.pdf).

```AES_SBox_GF_2_2_2_PolyNormMixBases/```: This directory contains all the fiels necessary to generate, simulate, verify and synthesize S-Box designs implemented using various GF(((2^2)^2)^2) composite field representations. To programmatically generate the S-Box designs, run ```python2 gen_AES_SBox_GF_2_2_2_PolyNormMixBases.py```. The output file ```AES_SBox_GF_2_2_2_PolyNormMixBases.v``` containing all 432 S-Box designs is also provided for reference. To verify all the designs, run ```source run_sim.sh```. It simulates each S-Box with all 256 possible inputs and compares the outputs with the LUT-based S-Box specification using the test-bench template ```AES_SBox_GF_2_2_2_PolyNormMixBases_tb.v.TEMPLATE```. The message ```PASS: Verification Suite Passed``` is displayed after all 432 simulations are completed. To synthesize all the designs, run ```source run_synth.sh```. It synthesizes each S-Box with the specified standard cell library in ```../stdcells.lib```. A post-synthesis area summary report ```AES_SBox_GF_2_2_2_PolyNormMixBases_synth_summary.csv``` is generated after all 432 synthesis runs are completed.

The ```gen_AES_SBox_GF_2_2_2_PolyNormMixBases.py``` program is written based on the theory presented in [Canright, "A Very Compact Rijndael S-Box," 2004](https://core.ac.uk/download/pdf/36694529.pdf).
